# Mozambique Channel Trough
Rondrotiana Barimalala<sup>**</sup>***

Thomas Webb

<sup>*</sup> University of Cape Town
 
rondrotiana.barimalala@uct.ac.za 

**This document has not been published. Permission to quote from it must be obtained from the author using the above contact details.**


# Introduction: Why is this feature/process important?
The Mozambique Channel Trough (MCT) is a low pressure area that is prominent in austral summer over the central and southern Mozambique Channel (Cook et al., 2004; Munday and Washington 2017). It is generated by a dynamical adjustment of the easterlies flowing over the topography of Madagascar and may be also sustained by local air-sea interaction due to relatively warm sea surface temperature (SST) over the channel (Barimalala et al., 2018). 

The low pressure area is located near the source of the South Indian Ocean Convergence Zone (SIOCZ), a dominant driver of of southern African rainfall (Cook 2000; Lazenby et al., 2016), and thus modulates the moisture transport within the SIOCZ, as well as the mean rainfall over the subcontinent. A strong MCT is characterized by an anomalous cyclonic circulation over the Mozambique Channel stretching southeastwards into the mid-or even high-latitude south Indian Ocean. It reduces the zonal moisture transport to mainland southern Africa, causing a decrease in rainfall in the area, while an increase in rainfall is triggered over Madagascar. A weak MCT, on the other hand, favors moisture penetration, thus more rainfall, into the mainland and reduces rainfall over Madagascar. 

Most coupled climate models show persistent large dipole-like rainfall biases over the central and eastern parts of the subcontinent (Munday and Washington, 2017). Barimalala et al., (2018, 2020) suggest that a poor representation of the MCT could be one of the potential causes of the rainfall biases in the models. Thus, the aim of this diagnostic is to track the representation of the MCT in different generations of coupled models.

This document details the calculation of the MCT index code as released at version 1.

# Diagnostic Overview: what does the diagnostic do?
The seasonal cycle of the MCT is presented in this diagnostic as a line graph. Based on Barimalala et al., (2018), the MCT index is defined as the area average of the relative vorticity at 850 hPa in the southern Mozambique Channel (35–44°E, 16–26°S). Global monthly zonal (‘ua’) and meridional (‘va’) winds from the CMIP5/CMIP6 models are used to compute the relative vorticity for the period of 1980-2015. It is worth noting that the code does not work with undefined (NaN) ‘ua’ and ‘va’ values, they have to be removed a priori. In addition, global data is required to calculate the vorticity.

This diagnostic is found in MCT.py in the LaunchPAD assessment area.

# Step by step method: how is it calculated?
For each model:

1. Extract ‘ua’ and ‘va’ monthly data at 850hPa for the period of study (1980-2015 in our case). 

2. Regrid the extracted data to have the same grid as the observation. This step is not mandatory but it is necessary if doing comparison between observation and model or between models.

3. Remove NaN values (replaced by zeros in our case here) in order to be able to calculate the relative vorticity, which is given by the curl of the horizontal velocity. Please note that step 4 will give an error if NaN values are kept. 

4. Compute relative vorticity (curl of the horizontal velocity) using windspharm. Please note this package requires global data.

5. Compute the monthly climatology (i.e. long term mean for each month)

6. Compute the MCT index: area average of the relative vorticity within 35–44°E, 16–26°S.

# Diagnostic Summary: what is output?
The output of this diagnostic is a seasonal cycle of the MCT index as a line graph. Strong negative values indicate strong MCT, whereas positive values indicate an absence of  the trough.


_Figure 1:_Seasonal cycle of the MCT index. Strong negative values indicate strong MCT. Units are in 10-6m.s-2


## Acknowledgements
The figure was designed by Rondro Barimalala, in connection with her work on the MCT (e.g. Barimalala et al. 2018, 2020). ### Tom Webb developed the code framework for the LaunchPAD project, and integrated this diagnostic into that framework.

We acknowledge the World Climate Research Programme’s Working Group on Coupled Modelling, which is responsible for CMIP, and we thank the climate modeling groups for producing and making available their model output.

## References
Barimalala, R., Desbiolles, F., Blamey, R. and Reason, C.J.C (2018) Madagascar influence on the South Indian Ocean Convergence Zone, the Mozambique Channel Trough and southern African rainfall. Geophys. Res. Lett., **45**, 11 380–11 389, [ https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079964](https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079964) .

Barimalala, R., Blamey, R., Desbiolles, F. and Reason, C. J.C. (2020) Variability in the Mozambique Channel Trough and Impacts on Southeast African Rainfall, Journal of Climate, 10.1175/JCLI-D-19-0267.1, **33**, 2, (749-765).  [https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-19-0267.1](https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-19-0267.1) 

Cook, C., Reason, C. J. C., & Hewitson, B. C. (2004). Wet and dry spells within particularly wet and dry summers in the South African summer rainfall region. Climate Research, 26,17–31. doi:10.3354/cr026017

Cook, K. H. (2000). The South Indian Convergence Zone and interannual rainfall variability over southern Africa. Journal of Climate, 13(21), 3789–3804. _[https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0442(2000)013<3789:TSICZA>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0442(2000)013%3C3789:TSICZA%3E2.0.CO;2)_

Lazenby, M. J., Todd, M. C., and  Wang, Y. (2016). Climate model simulation of the South Indian Ocean Convergence Zone: Mean state and variability. Climate Research, 68(1), 59–71.  https://doi.org/10.3354/cr01382

Munday, C., & Washington, R. (2017). Circulation controls on southern African precipitation in coupled models: The role of the Angola low. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 122, 861–877.  [https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JD025736](https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JD025736) 
